---
title: "A short introduction to Python containers"
teaching: 5
exercises: 5
questions:
objectives:
---


### Get ready for the session

First thing, we need to download the workshop materials from Github:

```
$ cd /data
$ git clone https://github.com/PawseySC/containers-astronomy-workshop.git
$ cd containers-astronomy-workshop/exercises
$ export EXERCISES=$(pwd)
```
{: .bash}

Here we're defining the variable `EXERCISES`, pointing to the subdirectory of the repository that contains inputs and scripts for the various examples.


> ## Trick: get rid of *sudo docker*
> 
> Docker requires administrative rights to be used, so in principle every command requires *sudo*, as in `sudo docker`.  
> 
> To save typing, you may want to add your user to the `docker` user group:
> 
> ```
> sudo usermod -aG docker $USER
> ```
> {: .bash}
> 
> then exit the terminal session and open a fresh new one.  
> 
> From now on, you can run `docker` without *sudo*.  
> Note that under the hood *docker* commands will still require admin rights.
{: .callout}


### A principle for containerised applications

When containerising sets of applications, two approaches are possible:

1. one container application, or
2. one container for the whole software stack of a workflow

Often a workflow relies on a set of standalone packages, for instance a bunch of C applications in bioinformatics.  In this case, we typically advise for the first approach, that is simpler to maintain and more modular, in that changes in one application or workflow tasks do not impact the others.

However, the situation is different when a workflow is built upon a set of packages that are written in Python (or R): in this case, very often these rely on a large set of dependencies, creating a complex dependency tree.  Here, building distinct containers for each package would imply building multiple dependency trees, with potential issues in maintenance and even inconsistencies at runtime, that might manifest when incompatible versions of the same dependency are used for distinct packages.  

In this context, then, we recommend to create one single container for the full set of Python (or R) packages required for a given workflow.


### Some caveats in running Python containers

1. **Clean shell environment**

    As Python is often used by system services and utilities, it is common in HPC clusters to have Python related variables defined in the shell environment.  These may include `PYTHONPATH`, `PYTHONUSERBASE`, `PYTHONSTARTUP` and others.  
    Now, *singularity* by default favours integration over isolation, and thus passes the host shell environment onto the container.  

    As a result of these two factors, a Python container may show unintended and uncontrolled behaviours.

    As an example, try and open a Python console using the `docker://python:3.8-slim` container image:

    ```
    $ singularity exec docker://python:3.8-slim python3
    ```
    {: .bash}

    ```
    [..]

    Python 3.8.5 (default, Aug  4 2020, 16:24:08) 
    [GCC 8.3.0] on linux
    Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
    >>> 
    ```
    {: .output}

    This run is fine; close the shell typing `exit`, or pressing `Ctrl-D`.

    But now suppose the host variable `PYTHONSTARTUP` is defined:

    ```
    $ export PYTHONSTARTUP="/etc/pythonstart"
    $ singularity exec docker://python:3.8-slim python3
    ```
    {: .bash}

    ```
    Python 3.8.5 (default, Aug  4 2020, 16:24:08) 
    [GCC 8.3.0] on linux
    Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
    Could not open PYTHONSTARTUP
    FileNotFoundError: [Errno 2] No such file or directory: '/etc/pythonstart'
    >>> 
    ```
    {:. output}

    Now you get a warning as that path is non existent in the container.  
    This is innocuous, but the interference of host Python variables is often a source of errors.

    To be safe, always run Python containers with `singularity exec -e`, or `--cleanenv`, to isolate the container shell environment:

    ```
    $ export PYTHONSTARTUP="/etc/pythonstart"
    $ singularity exec -e docker://python:3.8-slim python3
    ```
    {: .bash}

    ```
    Python 3.8.5 (default, Aug  4 2020, 16:24:08) 
    [GCC 8.3.0] on linux
    Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
    >>> 
    ```
    {:. output}

2. **Singularity syntax to pass shell variables**

    As the tip `1.` above suggests to isolate the container shell environment from the host one, how can you then set environment variables in the container when you need to?  

    Well, you can use the dedicated Singularity syntax.  This involves setting the required variable in the host, prepended with the prexif `SINGULARITYENV_`, as in:

    ```
    $ export SINGULARITYENV_VARIABLE="value"
    ```
    {: .bash}

    Then, you get the variable in the container:

    ```
    $ singularity exec docker://python:3.8-slim bash -c 'echo $VARIABLE'
    ```
    {: .bash}

    ```
    value
    ```
    {: .output}

3. **Mounting a fake home for writing files**

    It may happen that some packages need to write service or configuration files in the user's `$HOME` directory.  This can be an issue on HPC clusters, where user's homes might not be mounted by default:  

    ```
    $ singularity exec docker://python:3.8-slim ls $HOME
    ```
    {: .bash}

    ```
    ls: cannot access '/home/ubuntu': No such file or directory
    ```
    {: .output}

    You might be tempted to bind mount it at runtime, but this is not your best option: we recommend AVOIDING mounting home for improved security.

    Instead, you can create a service directory in the host filesystem, to be used as a *fake* home in your container:

    ```
    mkdir fake_home
    $ singularity exec -B fake_home:$HOME docker://python:3.8-slim touch $HOME/testfile
    ```
    {: .bash}

    Then, files written in the fake home will be available from the host; you can keep them for future sessions if you want/need to, or clean them up after runtime:

    ```
    $ ls fake_home
    ```
    {: .bash}

    ```
    testfile
    ```
    {: .output}
